Wire is a network protocol definition language derived from Interface Definition Language1 (IDL). It is used to represent an on the wire representation of a certain network protocol in an intuitive and highly abstract manner. The Wire compiler is designed to address the automatic generation of code that handles all of the defined protocol's communications, parsing and construction of packets.

Coding handlers for network protocols is time consuming and highly error prone. One must deal with sanity checks upon packet parsing/construction, integer byte ordering and sizes, various charset encodings, data alignment and padding, error reporting and debugging. Furthermore when considering protocol operations, programmers must take into account memory allocation and buffering, timing, various types of operations such as blocking/nonblocking operations and synchronous/asynchronous operations.

Programmers take various approaches for tackling coding of network protocol handlers and thus code reusability is low, modularity is weak and uniformity is non-existent (in most cases). Wire is intended to provide an intuitive way of defining a protocol that can be situated in OSI Layers 2-7. Furthermore the code generated by the compiler fits nicely with the network protocol theory and as such is easy readable. The  API provided by the generated code library tends to be simple and easy to use, but of course that depends on the protocol definition. To that point Wire strives to provide an abstraction to its users from underlying networking technologies (Berkley sockets, WinSock, TLI) and host configurations (byte/bit ordering, register sizes, floating point representations).

The initial idea for Wire was to create a definition language in which one would define a protocol, run it trough a compiler and get a library that would handle that particular network protocol. The protocol at hand is already suppose to have a specification such as Internet protocol or even HTTP. Thus with a single Wire definition a compiler could generate handlers in multiple languages and/or for various systems and frameworks. For example code generation could be extended to generate Lua libraries or more specifically NMAP NSE libraries which are written in Lua but exist in a more specialized framework. Also one could generate dissection methods for Wireshark or even use ti to make fuzzers to test some network implementation.

The extension to the initial idea is to define your own network protocol for whatever purposes. This makes Wire a definition language and the underlying encoding algorithms a serialization protocol. To compare Wire to other similar projects that provide a definition language and a serialization protocol for that particular language one could mention technologies used in remote procedure call protocols such as Microsoft RPC protocol which uses IDL as a definition language and NDR as a serialization protocol. Other examples may include Google Protocol Buffers, ASN.1, JSON, Network File System (NFS) protocol and External Data Representation serialization protocol, REST, SOAP etc.

WIRE LOGO by Studio42 -- www.studio42.hr